---
layout: default
title: "QTk -- An Integrated Model-Based Approach to Designing
Executable User Interfaces"
---


2001


Donatien Grolaux, Peter Van Roy, Jean Vanderdonckt



[Postscript](http://www.ps.uni-sb.de/PapersOz/Others/dsvis2001.ps.gz)

[BibTeX Entry](http://www.ps.uni-sb.de/PapersOz/abstracts/dsvis2001.bib)



QTk is a tool built on top of Tcl/Tk that allows user interface
designers to adopt a cost-effective model-based approach for designing
executable user interfaces. QTk is based on a descriptive approach that
uses a declarative style where appropriate (symbolic records to specify
widget types, initial states, and geometry management; procedure values
to specify actions), augmented with objects and threads to handle the
active part of the interface. QTk offers four original advantages:
unicity of language (only one language serves as both modeling and
programming language), reduced development cost (the interface model
immediately gives rise to an executable user interface), tight
integration of tools (specification, construction, and execution tools
are all integrated), and improved expressiveness (the interface model
is very compact to produce and cheap to manipulate). The advantages are
made possible by a tight integration with a multiparadigm programming
language, Oz, that supports symbolic data structures, a functional
programming style, an object programming style, and cheap threads. QTk
is a module of the Mozart Programming System, which implements Oz. We
show how to port QTk to Java, which allows to retain some but not all
of the tool's advantages.





