---
layout: default
title: "Objects for Concurrent Constraint Programming"
---


1997


Martin Henz



[Book](http://www.wkap.nl/prod/b/0-7923-8038-X)

[BibTeX Entry](http://www.ps.uni-sb.de/PapersOz/abstracts/HenzBook.bib)



Concurrent constraint programming (ccp) is a recent development
in programming language design. Its central contribution is the
notion of partial information provided by a shared constraint
store. This constraint store serves as a communication medium
between concurrent threads of control and as a vehicle for their
synchronization.




Objects for Concurrent Constraint Programming analyzes the
possibility of supporting object-oriented programming in
ccp. Starting from established approaches, the book covers
various object models and discusses their properties. Small Oz, a
sublanguage of the ccp language Oz, is used as a model language
for this analysis. This book presents a general-purpose object
system for Small Oz and describes its implementation and
expressivity for concurrent computation.




Objects for Concurrent Constraint Programming is written for
programming language researchers with an interest in programming
language aspects of concurrency, object-oriented programming, or
constraint programming. Programming language implementors will
benefit from the rigorous treatment of the efficient
implementation of Small Oz. Oz programmers will get a first-hand
view of the design decisions that lie behind the Oz object
system.





